[Music]
always.
That was really comfortable.
>> Thanks. But hard and balanced, but it's
just like
I could have done five.
>> Um,
and five is actually
what I was doing when I did 300.
>> Yeah. Five of that was when I did 300
low bar.
>> So,
So, I think um yeah, I'm happy. All
right. Now, I'm going to warm up for low
bar. Today is squat day and I'm really
looking forward to squat days because my
legs, well, my leg is feeling good and
I'm not going to rush the process, but I
feel zero pain. And I believe that this
So, I tore my leg doing a 270 kg squat.
It wasn't a huge tear, but it was enough
to hurt and stop me for a while. So, I
believe I'm 7 weeks post injury and
three reps. This is my warm up. And this
gives me a whole bunch of confidence to
approach my real work, which is going to
be 240 kg low bar squats for two to
three reps. You know me, when I give you
a range, I'm always hoping for the top
end of that range. So, I'm hoping for
three reps, but if I get two, I'll also
be happy. But either way, I feel like my
strength is back, but I just don't want
to be jumping back to 270 and 280. It
was 270 kg that tore my quadricep. I
feel like I'm strong enough to lift that
now, but it's a process. Anyway, so that
was my warm up. Now, I'm going to do low
bar squats, work up to my top step, and
I'm going to talk to you about a few
things. There's two issues that I want
to be teaching you guys today. One of
them, how to actively plant your feet
into the ground, and what to do with
your hips and knees and stance to make
sure that you're able to squat heavy, be
balanced, be strong,
you know, and that all goes hand inhand
with staying injuryfree because weak
things break. And when you're not
strong, you're weak. And when you're
weak, that's when things can happen. So,
a lot of the times when I'm working with
people that have certain aches and
pains, I look at the way that they're
standing and the way they're approaching
their movement, and it's like, you're
not even using your muscles. You're just
going down and up. So, that's what I'm
going to be teaching you starting from
the stance and exactly what I do with my
feet and how it interacts with my my
hips and my legs and how that interacts
with how heavy I can squat. So now I'm
going to show you those examples as I'm
warming up on my first warm-up set for
low bar 70 kg. I'm going to show you
what I mean when I say active feet in a
squat. Okay. When I'm squatting, I don't
just stand here passively with a heavy
weight on my back and just go down and
up. When I'm standing here, my muscles
are actually on. Of course, I'm stacked
and my knees are locked out and I'm not
really using a huge amount of muscle,
but what I'm doing with my feet is
really, really important because that's
in going to initiate everything else
that I do when I come down. So, the
first thing that I do with my feet is
imagine I'm gripping onto the ground.
So, I'm holding on tight and externally
rotating both of my feet, right? So, my
right foot is going clockwise, my left
foot is going anticlockwise, right? So,
I'm externally rotating and gripping
onto the floor. Now, if you just uh
externally rotate, why don't you come
over here from front on and you'll see
what happens if I just externally rotate
and and this is what actually happens is
you will kind of be up on the edge of
your feet. That's not what I want. So,
if that's what happens, so you grip
tight, externally rotate, and if your
big toe comes off the ground, plant it
down, right? So, you're still grabbing
onto that ground. Now, what happens if
you're just passive, and this is where a
lot of people stuff up. And this is
where a lot of people's knees are out of
control, is is the knees kind of come
in. When I'm screwing my feet into the
floor, boom, that initiates that
external rotation, which is an action of
my glutes. So, when you're just standing
here and gripping onto the floor and
externally rotating, you feel your butt
is engaged. Now from here what happens
is because I'm externally rotating it's
going to position my knees so that they
are pointing in the same direction as my
toes which is outwards. Right? Now
what's the significance of knees out?
Knees out allows room for my pelvis to
achieve the bottom position and remain
neutral. Okay. So why is that important?
I'll tell you something. Last week I
spoke a lot about buttwink and I
mentioned a thing called hip joint
flexion and how we all have only a
limited amount of hip joint flexion
before we reach out in range. So this is
called hip joint flexion. Now this is
knees straight ahead right now this is
knees out right now most people have a
greater amount of hip joint flexion when
we have our knees out or that's called
this is outwards is abduction and hip
joint flexion. So we get a greater range
of motion of hip joint flexion when we
are abducted or when we have our knees
out. So what does that mean? So measure
how much
hip joint flexion you have with your
knees straight ahead. Now outwards most
people have a few more degrees of hip
joint flexion which means we are able to
access greater depth if we have an open
hip position. So the greatest
powerlifter of all time Ed Cohen has a
cue open your taint. So that means kind
of like open your hip position here. And
what we're doing is allowing room for
that pelvis to achieve that bottom
position and remain neutral so that we
don't go into buttwink at that bottom
position. Right? So I talk about the
pelvis like it's a bowl of soup. Don't
spill the soup. If you are anteriorly
rotating, you're spilling the soup out
the front. If you're posteriorly
rotating too much, you're spilling the
soup out the back. We want a neutral
pelvis or a neutral bowl of soup. And we
want to maintain that bowl of soup all
the way down without spilling it. Right?
So this is a reason why we want to be
planting our feet and thinking about
externally rotating. So when we drop
down, it's going to allow us to achieve
that bottom position and remain neutral,
which is where everything is stacked
from our pelvis through our spine in our
neutral rigid position. And that's going
to be the strongest position. So I want
you to see exactly how I do that when I
squat. I'll do a few reps so that you
can see. So when I'm standing here, I'm
not just standing. I'm not just
standing. I'm actively standing. So look
at my feet here. I'm gripping onto the
floor and screwing my feet into the
ground. This positions me in a way where
I can have that open hip position
rather than, you know, not even thinking
about it and letting the knees kind of
knock in and and
that I can feel my lower back rounding
which is weak. It's not stacked and my
hips are pushing back and what I want is
so this is my open hip position and this
is when my knees come in my hips push
back even further and it's not as
efficient. and it puts more load on my
back and it's not as strong. I don't get
to use my quads as much and that's what
I do want. I want an equal amount of
quads and hips and every single muscle
possible. So that's one of the biggest
things that you can do immediately. And
the best way you can think about that is
unloaded. So when you're warming up, so
just stand here. So stand here, relax.
Now grab onto the floor and screw your
feet into the ground. Okay. So what
happens here is I can feel it. My butt
is on from here. open hip position and
sit. Okay. And that's how I like to warm
up and that's how I do every single set
from start to finish. Next point on this
before we continue, ankles collapsing
in. So, this is an indicator that you're
not screwing your feet into the ground
or actively using your hips very well.
So, this is where you're quite passive.
So, what happens is the ankles on people
sometimes cave in. And the reason why
they do so the the the arches collapse.
Okay? So if your if your arches are
collapsing and this is happening to you,
usually that's because you're trying to
access more range of motion and you're
being blocked. So what do I mean by
that? So we only have a certain amount
of uh degrees of ankle joint
dorsif flexion. So here's the test for
how much you can dorsif flex. So for me,
it's not that amazing. Okay. So that's
me. So you keep your the heel of your
foot on the ground and you drive your
knee forward. Okay? Now that's how much
ankle joint dorsif flexion I have. Now
the thing is when I squat that's pretty
much all I need is for my knees to come
forward that much. Now if I'm not
positioning my hips correctly, I'll need
to access a little bit more range of
motion. So what I'll do to compensate is
I'll
cave I'll let my ankles cave in so that
I can get a little bit more range of
motion so that my hips don't need to.
So, if you're doing that, if your ankles
are caving in, that's exactly what
you're not doing is screwing your feet
into the ground. There should be kind of
like, you know, even foot pressure, but
slightly outwards. You should feel it
kind of holding on this way. And if
that's happening to you, your ankles
won't be collapsed. The arch of your
foot won't be collapsed. And this is
where you're going to be able to use
your strong hips rather than uh let the
knees cave in and kind of like rest on
the structure of your ankles maxing out
in their range of motion and your hips
maxing out on their range of motion.
Okay? So, watch me again. Now, I'm going
to do it with the bar. So, I stand in my
comfortable stance, which is just
outside of what's actually pretty wide,
but this is my comfortable stance.
Everyone's different. The first thing
that I do is open my hips. So, that I
don't just come down. I open my hips.
Boom. that action there. I'm gripping
onto the floor
and my knees and feet are tracking in
line
from start to finish. So, if you see,
you'll notice when I warm up now every
set, that's what I'm going to be aiming
for. If my knees are knocking in,
they're not stacked, and that's weak.
And that's exactly what you don't want
to do. All right, so there's a good tip
for you.
Boom. Boom. Boom.
[Music]
easy.
>> You know what I mean? You know what I
mean? What a day for a 20 kilogram jump.
Okay. Um, you know, I should be able to
do heavier than that for a triple, but
this is rehab. That's how it goes. I'm
slowly bringing it back. Um, and I'm
happy with that. 7 weeks after I tore my
quad, I did 240 kg for a triple. Uh, had
more in the tank.
I'm on track. I'm on track. Now I'm
going to go through the stance and a few
things that you guys can do to make you
better immediately. So one topic that I
want to raise with this is
knees knocking in in a squat. So VGUS
knees, you may have heard of that with,
you know, a lot of the science community
are talking about it being actually no
evidence to support that it's bad for
the knees or anything like that. And in
my opinion,
I don't disagree with that. I don't
think having the knees knocking in is
necessarily
the knees that are the problematic area.
Right? So, there's a lot more that's
happening when the knees knock in. And I
would say it's more to do with what's
happening at the hips and the back.
Right? So, get this. The strongest
position for a squat is where we have a
combination of all of our muscles put
together.
So what does that mean? Low bar squat is
typically hip dominant. So if I want to
use my hips more, I want to push I want
to use an open stance and push my hips
back. The more I do that, so if I go
really really wide and push my hips
back, so this is uh Westside barbell. If
you ever heard of Louis Simmons, they
teach very, very wide stance and it's
all hips, hips, hips, hips, hips. They
even teach that you shouldn't really be
using your quadriceps that much at all
for a squat. However, there is a
difference with the way that they used
to squat compared to modern day and that
is
they were all equipped. So, that's
equipped powerlifting. And most people
don't do equipped powerlifting. Yet,
they're looking at equipped powerlters
and taking advice saying, "Oh, that's
how they teach." I'll tell you right
now, if you had to use a squat suit, I
would say that Louis Simmons and
Westside Barbell would be the best
people to listen to for their techniques
for powerlifting style of movement with
the suit. So, so pushing into the suit,
so pushing your hips back into the suit
is where you get the most spring from
the suit. However, we're raw, right? So,
we don't have suits to support us to
push our hips back into. So, we're
pushing our hips back into nothing. So
either way, the more hips, the more you
widen your stance and push your hips
back, the more hips you use, but the
less quads you use, I don't really want
to use no quads. So therefore, it should
be a combination of bit of hips, but
also the more you bend your knees, the
more you can use the quadriceps. So it's
kind of like a combination of both. And
it really depends on your proportions
and where you're strong. But with me,
what I want to do is position myself in
the best way to be able to use as much
muscles as possible. Now, let's have a
look at this. When I bring my knees in,
or it's equivalent to bringing my stance
in, when I bring my stance in, the only
way I can get down, my my ankles only
bend so far. And then to get deeper, I
need to push my hips back, back, back,
back, back. So, that's equivalent to
what happens when the knees knock in.
Don't worry about where my feet are.
Worry about where that upper thigh bone
is. When those knees come in, my upper
thigh bone is here. And my pelvis
doesn't have room to drop straight down.
So here, it can drop straight down. When
my knees are in, it can't drop straight
down. It needs to go back to be able to
achieve that position. So therefore,
when the knees knock in, it's creating a
lot more load on the hips and back. All
right, that's the end of all the good
stuff for this session. I'm just going
to do hamstring curls now. So that's uh
very boring stuff, but all I did was two
sets. One set of stiletto squats, 200 kg
for three with the pause and one set of
three on 240 kg. Is that enough work?
Um, not really. Not really. But I'm
rehabbing. And that's one of the biggest
things with rehabing rehabbing is not
doing too much volume. So I don't want
to aggravate it. And I'm kind of just
gently getting there. Now, here's my
trade-off. I'm actually squatting two
times per week. So I squat every Monday
and Friday. So, um, if I was only doing
one session per week, I would probably
want to do a little bit more volume than
that. But that's something that I know
is, uh, a great way of progressing is do
it more times when you're fresh. Um,
rather than so do it more frequently.
So, so multiple sessions. All I'm doing
is two sets, two big sets in each in
each session. Now, that's of course it's
very very low volume and that's
actually, you know, if you got torn
muscles, what a lot of people do is they
don't train at all. So, for me, I'm
actually getting very, very effective
training in and hopefully soon I'll be
able to get a little bit more volume.
Um, and the goal is to get there in a
few weeks time, like maybe 3 weeks time.
When I get back to, you know, 260 kg on
the bar, then I'll start increasing my
volume. But for now, it's one top set of
stiletto squats, one top set of low bar
squats, and then I take all my gains and
run. I don't want to push it too far. I
don't want to walk away going, "Damn, I
did a little bit too much." So now all
I'm doing is hamstring curls and then
that's my session. So anyway, I hope you
enjoyed that and um if there's anything
else you want to see, of course, you
know, I do programs if you want to be
coached by me, uh that's what I do.
That's what my business is. Um but let
me just tell you, just because of this
information that I'm giving you is free
doesn't mean it has no value. This is
the information that I had to spend a
lot of money, spend a lot of time and
effort and energy to learn myself. Um
and it's it's yours for free. So I hope
you enjoy. Um, and I'll see you guys
next time.
[Music]
>> Not really. It doesn't really matter. I
mean, I don't think it's very
interesting.